We extend a warm welcome to your students, to your relatives and friends that you have invited to be here with you today, and to all others welcome.
Now we are ready to sing a song together. If you are able to, please stand.
We are going to sing song number 106, the title is Gaining Jehovah's Friendship, and it's based on Psalm 15.
There are many schools in the world, the public schools, private schools, trade schools, elementary schools, high schools, universities, colleges.
There is home schooling, there is online schools.
Into what category does Gilead school fall? Well, it's not a trade school, nor a school for higher worldly learning.
It is a school based on divine education, the highest form of learning.
The name Gilead is probably derived from Gali, meaning witness heap, according to Genesis 31, 47, and 48.
It generally refers in the Bible to the mountainous region east of the Jordan, and what about the term school?
Interestingly, the word comes from the Greek word school, which originally meant leisure.
It was for those who had the means and the leisure to go and learn something in a school.
It was for the upper strata of society, in Greece and other countries as well.
The working class or the poor people did not go to school back then.
But now, of course, in our time, in most countries, rich and poor can go to some sort of school.
Despite the fact that there's emphasis on schooling, there's 785 million illiterate adults in the world,
translating into one in five people on the planet.
And all the more education is emphasized.
That's why many young people go to universities and colleges, and many do this to become rich.
Back in 1988, the May 22 issue of awake on page 29 referred to a research that was done.
And it says, I quote, a new high of 71% of the freshmen in universities said that their reason for attending college was to make more money.
The findings were compiled from questionnaires completed by over 200,000 freshmen at 390 institutions.
Why did you students accept the invitation to attend Gilead?
To make more money after that was certainly not.
Was the major reason for coming here that desire to become spiritually rich?
Well, that desire is not wrong.
But if you came here primarily to get something, even spiritually, out of school, why would that not have been quite the right motive?
Did you come here primarily to benefit from the fine education?
Remember, Christian love is unselfish. It does not first of all think, what can I get out of it?
Christian love asks, how can I benefit others? Especially how can I benefit Jehovah?
Jehovah himself and I say 111 talks about benefit to him.
The issue is not so much how Gilead benefits you, but how can you benefit Jehovah after having received Gilead training?
So why did you come to Gilead? Would you agree that it is and should be love for Jehovah?
Is it not so that Jehovah should always come first?
After graduating from Gilead, will you leave as a rich person?
Well, you said no, no in the sense of material riches.
And yes, in the sense of spiritual riches.
However, you were already rich spiritually before you ever came to Gilead.
But Gilead has enriched you even more, wouldn't you agree?
In Jesus' time, and even today, people thought that being materially rich was proof of having God's blessing.
Yes, they thought that the rich ones were first to get saved, but really it was the opposite way around.
Which people said Jesus would have a hard time getting into the kingdom.
Why did people in Jesus' days think that the rich were favored with God or by God?
They may have thought of Psalm 112, 2 and 3, where it says,
the generation of the upright will be blessed, wealth and riches, material riches, are in his house.
They may also have thought about Proverbs 10, 22, where it says,
it is the blessing of Jehovah that makes one rich, and he adds no pain with it.
Now did Solomon under inspiration speak of spiritual riches?
Not exactly.
He referred to the fact that in ancient times, sometimes Jehovah blessed some of his servants with material.
Insight number one of the volume number one, page 340 explains Proverbs 10, 22 like this.
Jehovah blesses those whom he approves by protecting, prospering, guiding, giving success,
and supplying their needs, material needs, end of quote.
The Watchtower study article of August 1, 2007 correctly showed that the application of Proverbs 10, 22 resulted in prosperity and wealth for the ancient Israelites if they served Jehovah.
You can watch this on the monitors.
The artwork at the beginning of this Watchtower article showed what,
showed herds of sheep, vineyards, crops, etc., all of it being material blessings.
Solomon used the words rich or riches in Proverbs, at least 22 times.
It is interesting that in none of these other occurrences does he speak about spiritual riches.
Of course, the prosperity of the nation of Israel did not mean that every individual was wealthy,
or that those who had little were necessarily under divine disapproval.
Unforeseen occurrences might plunge individuals into poverty.
Death could leave behind orphans or widows.
So wealthy ones were to help the poor.
However, think of Solomon.
He became immensely rich, materially.
Why? Because of the blessing of Jehovah, not because of his own efforts or gifts from others.
Think of Abraham. Genesis 13.2 says,
and Abraham was very rich in livestock, silver, and gold.
Yes, the blessing of Jehovah made him rich, not his own efforts.
The meaning of Proverbs 10.22 can be seen also in line with what Abraham said to the king of Sodom,
whose goods he recovered in a battle.
And we can read this in Genesis chapter 14, verses 22 and 23.
But Abraham said to the king of Sodom,
I raise my hand in an oath to Jehovah the most high God,
make of heaven and earth, that I will not take anything that is yours from a threat to a sandal lace,
so that you may not say, I made Abraham rich.
Really, yes, the king of Sodom did not make Abraham rich.
It was Jehovah who made Abraham rich materially.
Or we can think of Job after his test.
He was materially even richer than he was before.
Jehovah arranged for that. He came to have about 14,000 sheep and 6,000 camels.
Proverbs 10.22 also says that Jehovah adds no pain with his material blessings.
How so? Watched our 2001, September 15, explained it,
that when faithful ones in pre-Christian times were blessed by Jehovah with riches,
they may still have some kind of pain.
But it never was caused by Jehovah.
Jehovah is the source of every good gift and every perfect present.
James 1, 17, hence his blessings never cause pain.
Now, how were things in the first century?
In the Christian Greek scriptures, the word rich, in Greek Plutiso, sometimes refers to spiritual riches.
Jesus said to those in Laodicea, according to Revelation 3, 17 and 18,
I advise you to buy from me gold, refined by fire, so that you may become rich spiritually.
To the congregation in Smirna, today's Ismere in Western Turkey,
Jesus said, I know your tribulation and poverty, but you are rich.
Revelation 2.9.
There were also materially rich Christians who may have become circumstantially
or due to certain abilities or by inheritance, rich, not because of a special blessing from Jehovah.
Now, what about today?
We trusted Jehovah also materially blesses his people.
By motivating the hearts of our brothers to donate enough so we are able to build kingdom halls, assembly halls,
branch offices, translation offices, and give away literature without charge.
The small donations of our brothers go a long way.
On the other hand, on an individual basis, some brothers are not blessed materially.
In some countries, some brothers eat only one meal a day because they cannot afford a second or third meal.
Like among ancient Israelites, being poor is not an indication that one does not have Jehovah's blessing.
Most brothers in the world are of moderate material means, but Jehovah definitely blesses them spiritually.
Jehovah's promise today is not to make anyone rich in a supernatural way,
but he promises to provide enough materially so one has the bread or the food for the day.
He moves the hearts of our brothers to help each other materially in times of need.
Therefore, you students, when you go to your assignments, you do not need to worry about material things.
Neither do you relatives that are here today need to worry about that.
Jehovah will care for the everyday needs of the students and all of us for that matter.
Now we will hear the next presentation by brother Joel Delinger, helper of the governing body, especially the service committee,
and his subject is never leave the classroom.
Jehovah's people enjoy an amazing privilege.
Whether we're in Gilead or not, all of us are taught by the grand instructor.
And Jehovah has never before is providing a divine education that reaches our hearts and improves our service to him.
But what does this mean for you, the students of the 139th class of Gilead,
who will soon graduate? It means this.
Class is not dismissed. Well, what do I mean?
Well, though you will be leaving Gilead and taking up assignments and all parts of the earth,
we want you to be assured that your grand instructor Jehovah and his figurative classroom will be going with you.
To develop this point a little bit further, let's examine how Jesus Christ paid close attention to divine instruction over the course of his very long life.
To begin, let's go to the Bible to Proverbs chapter 8, where we find an inspired description of wisdom, wisdom personify.
Now, you may be thinking, what does this have to do with Jesus and his training by Jehovah?
Well, let's see. Please read with me Proverbs chapter 8 and verse 22.
Jehovah produced me as the beginning of his way, the earliest of his achievements of long ago.
Now, focus your attention please on the opening statement, Jehovah produced me.
Could this apply to the quality wisdom? No. Wisdom did not have a beginning.
Jehovah is the source of wisdom and Jehovah has always existed.
Well, then what does this verse 22 mean?
Well, as we know, other parts of the Bible help us to understand this.
Jesus was the first born of creation.
He was produced by Jehovah as the beginning of his way.
Jesus is the earliest of Jehovah's achievements.
That also means that Jesus was the first student in the classroom of Jehovah.
Well, what kind of student did the first born son of God prove to be?
Take your eyes please, Diverse 30.
Here, wisdom personified, Jesus tells us, then I was beside him as a master worker.
I was the one he was especially fond of, day by day.
I rejoice before him all the time.
What do we know? From the very beginning, from the start, Jesus graciously accepted training.
He enjoyed being in Jehovah's classroom.
And what was it that drew Jesus back to the classroom day by day?
Was it a mere love of learning, intellectual stimulation?
Verse 22 reveals more.
It tells us that Jesus had a love of the Father.
A love of the Grand Instructor.
And that feeling was mutable.
What a beautiful environment for study and learning.
Well, this is a helpful reminder for all of us who are in Jehovah's figurative classroom.
It reminds us that learning from Jehovah is a pleasure, never a chore.
And it also means that as we learn and become diligent students,
we draw ever closer to our loving Father.
But look again at verse 30, please.
Here we notice that Jesus is described as a master worker.
Well, what work did he do at the beginning from early times?
Colossians chapter 1 and verse 16 tells us that by means of him,
all other things were created in the heavens and on the earth.
Notice how the Watchtower magazine described it in a beautiful way.
And I quote, in some respects, we might liken the cooperation between Father and Son
to that of an architect working with a builder or a contractor who specializes
in bringing the architect's ingenious designs to reality.
That's a beautiful picture, isn't it?
Think of that classroom setting, Jehovah and Jesus, Father and Son.
Can we try to imagine the joy that the two of them experienced
as they collaborated together and saw the fruitage of their labor?
First, Jehovah created myriads of spirit creatures, angels,
and then they began praising God alongside Jesus.
And then think of the awe that Jesus, the master worker,
the master contractor, the master builder, must have experienced
as he saw Jehovah's design plans for the physical universe,
for planet earth, for animal and plant life,
and then for the first humans created in God's image.
Well, what lesson do we learn from Jesus, the master worker?
We learn that Jesus example demonstrates that to become better workers,
to become a master worker, we first have to be master students.
We first need to be disciples.
Jesus, eagerness to learn from Jehovah enabled him to take on work assignments
that contributed to the outworking of Jehovah's purpose.
It's true for us today.
Graduates of Gilead or not, all of us who are diligent students
in Jehovah's classroom can become effective workers in the harvest
and take on any other sacred service assignment
that Jehovah may choose to give to us.
Well, we've learned a lot from Proverbs.
Let's take another example in Scripture that highlights how Jesus
sets the superb example of one who never left the classroom.
Please turn with me to Isaiah chapter 50
and notice a messianic prophecy found in verses 4 and 5.
That's Isaiah chapter 50 verses 4 and 5.
Here again, we have a word picture that reveals Jesus' attentive interest
in learning from the grand instructor.
Now, as we read, imagine that Jesus is speaking in his pre-human existence.
Notice what he says, Isaiah 50 verse 4.
The sovereign Lord Jehovah has given me the tongue of those taught
so that I may know how to answer the tired one with the right word.
He awakens me morning by morning.
He awakens my ear to listen like the taught ones.
The sovereign Lord Jehovah has opened my ear and I was not rebellious.
I did not turn in the opposite direction.
Could you visualize the scene?
A teacher who lovingly awakens his pupil morning by morning
for what purpose to learn to be taught another lesson in the classroom.
Prior to coming to earth, Jesus in that heavenly school
was taught by Jehovah what to say, what to speak, how to teach
to others when he would come to earth.
The father also prepared his son to face difficult tests.
And what do we know about Jesus when he was on earth
in a new type of classroom?
Jesus successfully passed every test of integrity.
Why? He went into the test well prepared.
Well, today it's true for us.
Thanks to our grand creators personalized and specialized training
at times, all of us can be prepared to face any challenge,
any test that may arise in the future.
Divine education inspires confidence.
Not fear. Confidence that Jehovah will be with us.
We can face the test and we can come out on the other side successfully.
But what do we need to do?
We need to keep our ears tuned, attentive to the instructor morning
by morning, day after day.
Well, we've looked at an example in Proverbs and in Isaiah.
There are many other examples in Scripture that highlight how Jesus
had an eagerness to learn and to apply what he learned.
For example, while on earth, do we ever find in the Scriptures
any evidence that Jesus had a condescending or superior attitude
towards humans by no means?
Jesus graciously accepted instruction from humans in perfect humans.
At the age of 12, for example, when Jesus came up missing,
where did his parents find him?
Luke's account tells us that he was at the temple sitting in the midst of the
teachers asking them questions.
The Bible also reveals that Jesus learned not only from other humans,
but also from his own experiences, his own sufferings and tests.
Hebrews chapter 5 and verse 8 tells us that Jesus learned obedience
from the things suffered.
Does going through a test enduring a suffering produce a benefit?
Is it a lesson that we should want to learn from?
Jesus example says yes.
Jesus didn't leave the classroom even when tested tremendously
while going through a difficulty.
Jesus came out of the test better, not bitter.
Jesus was made perfect.
In his role as a high priest, a merciful high priest,
because he went through such tests here on earth.
What an example Jesus serves for all of us
who want to be in Jehovah's classroom today.
Jesus now, after having acquired vast authority, vast experience,
more seniority than anyone, has never left the classroom of Jehovah.
But what can we?
What can you, the students of the 139th class of Gilead,
take away from this?
As you leave Gilead, we want you to remember
that the grants instructor and his classroom is going with you.
Like Jesus, respond to the training, rejoice in your privilege
to be a fellow worker with God, keep learning from others,
learn from life's experiences, and keep adding to God's praise.
Yes, we warmly encourage you to never, ever leave the classroom.
Now, we have the privilege to listen to one of the members
of the governing body, brother David's plane, and his subject is,
be loyal like Baroque, not Barak.
You know, don't mix up Barak with Baroque.
Well, I guess we'll hear more about that.
Thank you.
I'm done.
Well, some time ago, brother Tony Morris gave a very fine lecture
to the Bethel family.
And in that lecture, he encouraged us not to freeze people in time.
Do you find yourself doing that at times
where Bible characters are concerned?
What about Baroque?
What do you know about Baroque?
Now, likely, you know that he was Jeremiah's secretary,
and at one point, he got some counsel.
That's a start.
What else?
If that's all you remember about, Baroque would be a very good thing
for you to get better acquainted with the man.
So let's turn to the Bible.
Jeremiah, chapter 45.
Now, we first run into Baroque in the fourth year of Jehovahiacan,
who was the king of Judah.
So it may be that Baroque was new to the job
when we read what's recorded at Jeremiah 45, verse 2,
to start with.
Now, imagine the scene.
Baroque is asked by Jeremiah to bring his writing materials
and to sit down and take dictation.
And Jeremiah begins to speak, verse 2.
Jeremiah 45, beginning with verse 2.
This is what Jehovah, the God of Israel, says.
Have you got that, Baroque?
Have you got that down?
Concerning you, Baroque.
Baroque puts down his stylus.
He looks inquiringly at Jeremiah.
Keep writing. Keep writing.
You have said,
Oh, to me, for Jehovah has added grief to my pain.
I am weary from my groaning,
and I have found no resting place.
You should say to him,
this is what Jehovah says.
Look what I have built up.
I am tearing down.
And what I have planted, I am uprooting the entire land.
But you are seeking great things for yourself.
Stop seeking such things.
For I am about to bring calamity on all flesh declares Jehovah.
And wherever you may go,
I will grant you your life as a spoil.
Now suppose Baroque was new to the job
when we first read this in Jeremiah 45.
Have you always been proud of your initial reaction
when you got a new assignment
or when you got a change of assignment that you weren't expecting?
If so, would you like that initial reaction
to define you as a person forever?
It's a matter of not freezing people in time.
Now Baroque needed counsel,
and he received counsel.
But Jehovah didn't freeze Baroque in time.
In fact, he extended further privileges to Baroque later on.
Now Baroque took his counsel like a man.
We might soak when we receive counsel,
but there's no evidence that Baroque did.
He could have said,
look, I don't mind getting counsel, Jehovah,
but do I have to write it down?
Is someone going to read this?
But there's no record that he ever did that.
Now what was Baroque's problem?
Well, number one, he's not focused.
He is not happy with what he's doing now.
I'm a member of the royal family.
I have talent.
I have potential.
I'm not being used to my potential.
Number two, he's not concerned about what Jehovah is doing.
He's more concerned about himself
and what he wants to do.
I'm not being used to my potential.
Has that thought ever crossed your mind?
If it has, would you want that to define you as a person forever?
So what's the lesson?
Don't always be looking at what you would like to be doing.
You'd like to be doing something else.
Be happy in doing what you were doing now.
Be happy with your assignment right now.
Now, to find out what happens after the scroll is written,
you have to turn to Jeremiah 36.
Now remember, the book of Jeremiah is not in chronological order.
So chapter 36 comes after chapter 45.
I didn't write it.
Jeremiah 36.
And verses 46, it tells you what happened after Baroque wrote down the scroll.
Verse 4, it says,
Jeremiah then called Baroque, the son of Naraya,
and Jeremiah dictated all the words that Jehovah had spoken to him,
and Baroque wrote them in the scroll.
So now you have a scroll.
But look what happens next.
Verse 5.
Then Jeremiah commanded Baroque,
I am confined and unable to enter the house of Jehovah.
So you are the one who must go in and read aloud the words of Jehovah
from the scroll that you wrote at my dictation.
Read them in the hearing of the people at the house of Jehovah.
So now Jeremiah has written all of these things,
this very strong message,
but he gets Baroque to deliver the message to the people.
How does Baroque react?
Does he for swear this opportunity?
Do I want out of this? No.
In verse 8, it says,
So Baroque, the son of Naraya did,
all that Jeremiah the prophet had commanded him.
He read aloud from the scroll the words of Jehovah at the house of Jehovah.
So first of all, he reads the scroll to the people.
And then the princes decide that they would like to hear what's on the scroll.
Now what do we know about the princes?
Four years earlier, these same princes had tried to put Jeremiah to death.
And now they're asking Baroque to read the scroll.
Baroque could have said, look, I'm in the hot seat now.
This is a terrible thing. The pay is terrible.
The hours are terrible.
I don't need this pressure, but he didn't.
He courageously read the words to the princes.
And when the princes heard these words, they decided that the king
who had a terrible temper,
that the king needed to hear these words as well.
And wisely, they suggested to Jeremiah and to Baroque that they had better hide.
And that turned out to be good advice.
So now picture this.
Jeremiah is the prophet, but who's getting in trouble?
Baroque.
In fact, later, the princes thought that Baroque was the ringleader
and that Jeremiah was just a puppet of Baroque's.
So he was beginning to take more and more responsibility for things.
Well, sure enough, when the king heard what was on the scroll, he got very angry.
And he put out a warrant for the arrest of Jeremiah and Baroque.
Probably it was that part about his burial being the burial of a donkey
that the king didn't like.
He didn't like it and a warrant is put out for their arrest.
Now did Baroque have reason to believe that he'd be killed?
Now if he was listening when he heard the counsel that Jeremiah had given him,
what did you hope to say?
You will have your life as a spoil.
So whatever the princes did, whatever the king did to him,
he would not be able to kill the man.
Now what happened to that project that Baroque had worked so hard on?
Well, it was red to the king.
The scroll was red to the king.
And as each role was done, the king cut it up and he put it into the fire.
And all that work was for nothing.
Have you ever worked on a project that was scrapped?
If so, you know the feeling.
But then Jehovah calls Jeremiah and he says,
now I want you to take another scroll,
and I want you to write all the words on that scroll that were on the first scroll.
But who's going to do the work?
Oh, Baroque!
Would you come here, please, and bring your writing materials.
Baroque had no idea if that scroll was going to be burned up as well.
But that scroll turned out to be very valuable.
And Baroque had no idea how much value that scroll was going to have
Jesus, the Apostle Paul, and many others quoted from the book of Jeremiah.
And Baroque was able to contribute to that.
We have no idea sometimes how much value a project that we are working on is going to have.
Well, how long did Baroque remain in his assignment?
The Bible tells us that 18 years later,
he is still loyally at Jeremiah's side.
What's the lesson for you, dear brothers and sisters?
Are you going to be found loyally at your post, no matter what challenge you face in your new assignment?
One day, Baroque is going to be resurrected,
and you're going to get a chance to meet him.
You'll say, I know all about you.
Baroque will roll his eyes and say, I know, I know you're looking for great things for yourself.
I've heard it a thousand times since I was resurrected.
But then you'll say, no, that's not what I mean.
You were courageous. You were humble.
You were faithful and loyal.
You were loyal both to Jehovah and to Jeremiah.
I was inspired by your account.
And I wanted to be just like you.
Next we hear from brother James Coffin, who starts with the school department, theocratic schools department.
And his subject is, apply the rule.
In less than 20 words, Jesus, the master teacher,
condensed much of the Hebrew scriptures into one single principle.
And in doing so, he gave a moral compass to humankind for all time.
Let's remind ourselves of those words as they're found in the sermon on the Mount.
Turn with me, please, to Luke chapter 6.
We're going to read verse 31, and you can leave your bibles open here, if you would.
Luke 631.
Also, just as you want men to do to you, do the same way to them.
Now these words, I'm sure you recognize, are often referred to as the golden rule.
And this rule has been verbalized, quoted, and recorded with some variations in virtually all languages and all cultures around the earth.
Every day and in a variety of ways, all of us are tested as to how we will apply the rule in our lives.
Perhaps the most difficult of those tests are in association with the application of Jesus words found in verse 37.
Let's read just a latter part of that.
Luke 637.
It says, keep on forgiving, and you will be forgiven.
Keep on forgiving.
So how do these words apply to you?
The soon to be graduates of the 139th Class of Gilea.
The question is, how willing and how eager will you be to keep on forgiving?
When you leave this place, brothers and sisters, you're going to continue to be surrounded by imperfect people.
You're surrounded by imperfect people trying to do the perfect will of God.
And they're going to be trying to do it under some of the most difficult circumstances in human history.
I don't know if you've noticed or not, but imperfect people tend to make mistakes.
It's hard to imagine, but it is true.
Imperfect people say the wrong thing, they make poor decisions, they act thoughtlessly.
And then added to this fact is that when imperfect people work together, worship together, preach together, live together, play together.
Sooner or later, there's going to be something happen that is a cause for offense.
Now, if it hasn't happened to you, just wait.
Because it will come, that's guaranteed.
And when it comes, don't be too surprised and don't be too quick to rush to judgment.
Because the truth of the matter is that the day you become offended may also be the same day that you have offended another yourself.
And at the very least, you can be assured that we have offended Jehovah probably numerous times that day already.
And that's why in virtually every prayer, we ask Jehovah to please forgive us for our sins.
So the question, how willing will you be to forgive others, to apply the rule in your life?
And why is it so important to do so?
Let's look at verse 27, well we're here.
Jesus said, but I say to you who are listening, continue to love your enemies.
Did you notice that? Continue.
You see, it's a Christian requirement actually to forgive others even though they may offend us repeatedly.
Now, I can see it on your face.
You're sitting there and you're thinking, well, that sounds really good in theory.
But it's easier said than done.
And in fact, it is easier said than done.
And you know why? Because our emotions become involved.
And when emotion becomes involved, it always clouds clear thinking.
So how are we to freely forgive, to put these things behind us, to imitate Jehovah as he wants us to do that?
Well, the answer is basic. Apply the rule.
Now, here's five suggestions that can help us, okay?
Number one, look at the principle in verse 36.
Verse 36, it says, continue being merciful just as your father is merciful.
Now, we know that if we try to walk in the footsteps of Jesus and imitate Jehovah, that he'll help us.
So step number one, we need to continue to ask Jehovah to help us to imitate him.
And then you know what you have to do. You have to exercise your will.
We know that Jehovah blesses us when we put forth effort.
We pray to him, we put forth effort, we get the blessing.
Some would say, well, when it comes to forgiving, I just don't feel like it.
Well, try to understand that forgiving another isn't about how you feel.
It's an act of your will.
So do what Jehovah says is right, and your heart will catch up later.
Step number two, develop empathy.
So our brothers are bruised like us, they're faulty like us or victims like us.
They're imperfect like us.
And we're so thankful that Jehovah has compassion on us.
Of course, we understand that when you're wrong, when you have your feelings hurt,
there's no right that seems more sacred than the right to get even.
We want a balancing of the scales.
We want justice. Someone has to pay.
Someone has paid.
And that someone is Jesus.
When we develop the same tenderness that Jesus had toward others,
then our compassionate heart can also become a forgiving heart.
Point number three, remember that no matter what another person does or says,
you still have to act like a Christian.
No one else is responsible for how you act or react than yourself.
And so, Jehovah, he's not unreasonable.
He understands that emotional wounds take time to heal.
But a failure to forgive eventually becomes a sin in itself.
It will toward another person will not change their heart.
It will, however, change yours.
On the other hand, we could have the privilege of helping a brother, sister, do better.
Be more attendee to the things they say or the way they act.
Look at this principle in verse 38.
It says, practice giving and people will give to you.
The latter part says, for with the measure that you are measuring out,
they will measure out to you in return.
Now, Jesus wasn't just talking about material giving,
but he was talking about deciding and putting forth an effort to live in a way that helps us
grow spiritually and will help others to do the same.
Point number four.
And this has been emphasized throughout the Gilead course.
Jehovah cares deeply about how humans interact with one another.
He cares about how we treat one another.
Jesus said by this, all will know that you are my disciples that you have love.
And we consider our brotherhood something very precious.
I know you would agree.
But when we quit forgiving another,
that precious relationship begins to end.
Be determined.
Allow no place for the devil.
Apply the rule.
Forgive the debt.
Surrender your right to an apology.
Surrender your right to get even.
Surrender your right to hold a grudge.
Value your relationship with your brothers and sisters,
more than your ego.
De-throwing yourself.
One final point.
Satan's rebellion has allowed Jehovah's perfect qualities to become more obvious than ever.
And that includes his willingness to forgive.
So we have a unique opportunity.
We can imitate our God.
Apply the rule.
And you can experience the joy that Jehovah feels by freely forgiving others.
And you will enjoy the brotherhood and the brothers will enjoy you.
Apply the rule.
And you'll strengthen the organization by your interaction with others.
And you will enjoy the greatest blessing of all.
The approval of your Heavenly Father, Jehovah.
No brother, Mark, no mayor.
Long time.
Kill it instructor.
We'll speak to us on the subject.
Keep the miracle going.
The baby boy was born in response to a prayer.
That prayer touched Jehovah's heart so much that he inspired the boy when he became a man to record it.
The boy was Samuel.
The prayer was Hanna's.
The normal circumstances, the sentiments of personal prayers, they're not heard by humans.
But Jehovah considers the miracle of a personal prayer to be a private matter.
However, Jehovah wanted the two prayers of Hanna to be recorded.
How precious they must have been to him.
And how eager, Samuel must have been to help us to know about his mother and especially her prayers.
Particularly the one recorded at 1 Samuel chapter 2.
That prayer was special to Samuel.
Why?
Because the words and feelings and thoughts of that prayer helped define who Samuel became.
How many times did he hear about that prayer?
Once a year when his mother brought him his sleeveless coat, we don't know.
But what we do know is that Samuel kept the miracle of that prayer going.
How?
By allowing the sentiments and feelings contained in that prayer to shape and mold his life.
Now it's your turn.
Let's now examine how some 3,000 years later you can keep the miracle going.
How?
By allowing the feelings, the thoughts and the sentiments contained in that prayer to help you fulfill your assignments.
Let's open our Bibles 2.
1 Samuel chapter 2.
And we'll begin again to see how you can keep the miracle of this prayer going as you fulfill your commission in your respective assignments.
Chapter 2.
We'll start at verse 3.
We're going to take that last sentence.
1 Samuel chapter 2, verse 3.
And by him, this is what Hannah says.
And by him, Jehovah, deeds are rightly evaluated.
Hannah knew that.
Hannah knew that deeds are rightly evaluated by Jehovah.
She experienced that first hand when Eli went ahead and misjudged her.
She began to accuse her of something that she was not doing.
He jumped to the conclusion and said, you're drunk.
Now, Hannah didn't argue with Eli.
Nor did she say, what about your wicked sons?
Take care of them first.
Nor did she spend this inordinate amount of time justifying and vindicating herself.
She simply explained, I'm not drunk.
And moved on.
She didn't obsess and rehash mentally over and over again the incident.
Does he really think I was drunk?
Does he still believe I'm drunk?
He didn't do that.
No.
Hannah continued to show that Jehovah understood her situation.
The Bible says clearly she ate and drank and her face became self or no longer downcast.
She was confident her deeds and motives were rightly evaluated by Jehovah as we see here in verse 3.
Now, what about Samuel?
Samuel kept the miracle going as he allowed the sentiments of that prayer help him to overcome discouragement.
For example, he tirelessly encouraged his brothers to subdue the Philistines,
to worship Jehovah with a complete heart.
And yet after decades of pouring himself out for his brothers, the hard work that he did,
he was rejected by the very, very people that he was trying to help.
But that did not stop him from serving Jehovah God.
Nor did it cripple him from supporting a major organizational adjustment in his day.
That is, going from the time period of the judges to the kings.
He supported that.
Why? Because Samuel is confident he knew that his deeds, his works, his motives were rightly evaluated by Jehovah.
Now, it's your turn.
Will you keep the miracle of this prayer going as you trust that your deeds are rightly evaluated by Jehovah?
For example, today, we all have work assignments.
Tomorrow, those assignments might change.
If a change comes due to some organizational adjustment or shifting circumstances, this is what happens.
But you don't want to second guess yourself worth or your confidence or the confidence that Jehovah God has in you.
Continue to trust Jehovah and realize that he has interest in you as a person.
You're not dedicated to a work or an assignment.
You're dedicated to Jehovah God.
That never changes. That dedication.
It's true and it's constant.
It's Jehovah's approval. That's the important thing that you always want to focus on.
You keep the miracle of the prayer going when you trust that your motives are rightly evaluated by Jehovah.
You're motives. That's the key.
Now, how many times, again, in class, if we discussed motive, motive, Matthew 11 verse 19,
we take to heart that Bible principle. Wisdom is vindicated by its works.
Hannah knew that. Hannah lived that and we encourage you to do the same.
So if you are misunderstood, which will happen from time to time, or someone says something unkind about you,
and that too may happen, don't overreact and say or do things that you will regret later.
As one writer put it, don't worry about what negative things people say about you.
Just live your life in a way that no one will believe it.
Now let's go back to chapter 2 and let's look at verse 8.
Hannah says, he Jehovah raises the lowly one from the dust.
He lifts up the poor from the ash heap.
Hannah knew that from personal experience. She knew that.
Hannah felt Jehovah's compassion in his dealing with her lowly and humiliated condition.
She knew that. These words must have deeply touched even David because he used very similar wording at Psalm 113 and verse 7.
Therefore, even in David's day, he continued the miracle of this prayer.
And now again, it's your turn.
You keep the miracle going by reviving the spirit of the lowly ones and the heart of those being crushed,
lifting them up out of the ash heap.
Now we know you can do that because we've observed how you've treated each other for the past five months as classmates.
When you sensed a fellow student was down in the dump, in the ash heap, what did you do?
You did something about it. You lifted them out. We watched that.
And that is why as a class, you become inseparable, especially you four sisters.
You go everywhere together. You eat together. You do everything.
You're like glue. But it's only been five months.
How did that happen? It's because of your personal interest in each other.
So here's the point. Now you're going to your assignments.
Will you continue to show that same keen interest that you showed in each other with your classmates?
Will you show that same interest in others in your assignments?
We know you can do it.
So ask yourself, what could cause my brother to be in the figurative ash heap?
First you ask yourself, what could even cause him to be there?
Is it that perhaps he's discouraged because of a spiritual setback?
Was he or she overlooked?
Do they feel not appreciated? Are there works not appreciated?
Will I notice someone in the dump, especially ones who appear insignificant from a human standpoint?
Will I come to their aid just as quickly as I came to the aid of my fellow classmates during these five months?
Will I give those who have made mistakes another chance when I see they have grown and matured?
Remember that you don't want to view weaker ones as a liability or allow procedures to become more important than people.
We are not a military organization. We are a family.
And as a family we lift ones out of the ash heap and build bonds of mutual confidence and trust.
Now let's go back to chapter 2 and this time we're going to read verse 9.
This prayer is wonderful and you're going to keep the miracle of this prayer going in your own life.
Verse 9, he guards the steps of his loyal ones.
That's what Hannah said. Jehovah guards the steps of the loyal ones.
I've seen that Hannah could connect the dots.
I know Jehovah gave me this son.
So I trust that if he gave me this son and I bring him to the tabernacle that Jehovah is going to take care of him.
She could connect the dots.
She didn't reason. I'm not going to bring my little boy to the tabernacle.
I'm not going to bring him to Shiloh until I see Jehovah clean things up in Shiloh.
When I see half-nigh infinius remove, then I know I'll bring my boy there but not one minute beforehand.
She did not say that.
Hannah was loyal to Jehovah's arrangements that were in place at the time and she was confident that Jehovah guards the loyal ones.
She knew that.
Samuel, he too could connect the dots.
He knew his birth was the result of a miracle.
As he grew up, he saw Jehovah's hand at work in his own life.
He witnessed prophecies being fulfilled.
He could connect the dots.
You see, Jehovah was real to Samuel.
Therefore, he too could reason as his mother.
If I am loyal to Jehovah, he will protect and guard me.
He kept that miracle going.
It wasn't always easy though for Samuel.
How many memories?
How many tears?
Filled his little sleeveless coat.
His mother's signature piece, the label could have read, made by Hannah.
How many nights did he cry himself to sleep as a little boy thinking of home or the corrupting influence of Eli's sons?
Yet his life course proved he was no mama's boy, but a leader loyal to Jehovah and his arrangements.
And now it's your turn.
You keep the miracle of this prayer going.
How by being convinced that Jehovah guards the loyal ones.
Now, as Brother Kaufman mentioned, due to your imperfection or the imperfection of others, things will not always be easy for you.
As you serve in God's organization, you know that.
But trust that if you loyally do what is right, Jehovah will guard you.
And just as Samuel helped to stabilize the national organization in his day,
we are confident that you too, with your training, will stabilize and encourage Jehovah's little sheep.
In fact, this is your job.
This is now your commission.
Because of your Gilead training and graduation, it's as if the governing body is handing you a silver talent in telling you,
now you go to business, go to business, they trust you.
Gilead school has given you the key to unlock a deeper relationship with Jehovah, more meaningful relationship with him.
And therefore we know with his help you will continue to do the right, noble and spiritual thing as you rub shoulders each day with your brothers and sisters.
Now that's up to you.
May your signature piece or your trademark be one that sticks to Jehovah and his organizational arrangements, trusting your Heavenly Father to strengthen you to do his work his way.
So now what do we want you to remember?
We want you to remember this.
Like Hannah and Samuel, take comfort in knowing your deeds, your motives are being rightly evaluated by Jehovah.
That is so important.
Show compassion by lifting your brothers from the ash heap.
Trust in Jehovah's arrangements having full confidence that he guards loyal ones, be loyal.
And it is our prayer that the theocratic education that you have received at Gilead school has imparted to you the wisdom and the strength to keep the miracle going.
There are many other things but the Numerian emphasized loyalty.
It's appropriate therefore that when we can stand and sing together the song entitled Ever Loyal.
It's based on Psalm 1825.